I'll just get started with
our- (laughs) Okay. (laughs) You're a l- (laughs) long way away.
The rails are sleeping you.
We'll get started with our public session, as it's just gone, um, past 1:00 PM.
We've got our first submitter in person, Bruins Luu.
I might have mispronounced that, but please correct me.
Welcome.
Thank you.
We've
got, um, received your written submission.
You've got five minutes for your oral submission, so please feel free to use as
much of that time as you wish, or leave some time for questions from committee.
Over to you.
Thank you. Uh, kia ora koutou katoa.
For Bruins Luu taku ingoa. It's a great privilege to be able to present,
uh, the submission from myself and Scott Favell here today.
Uh, we think that the current regulatory
systems, Internal Affairs amendment bill, as it also can
pertains to identity services, is an excellent opportunity
to introduce a non-compulsory
photo ID for, for people who are unable to get a driver's
license, due to one reason or another.
And I'm gonna talk you guys through what it
means for having an s- government issued ID for someone like
myself, who is blind. So I have this
story from a f- wee while back, where I went to the
supermarket to purchase alcohol.
And
because it's age restricted, I, the duty manager had to ask me to,
um, introduce, uh, to produce my
identity, uh, my ID. So I gave them my 18 plus
card, and then the duty manager was like, "Oh, I don't know
what this is. Do you have a driver's license?" And I was like,
"What?" while holding my cane as well.
(laughs)
And they were like, "Yeah, do you have your driver's license?"
And the moment they said, said that, they brought me
back into a, uh, into a very vivid scene from
when I was 16, where I tried to get a driver's
license. And so, at the time, I went to
the optometrist's office to get a medical certificate for it.
And so the optometrist, they, I paid my f- consultation
fee, they took me out back, did some tests, and then they were like,
"Okay, here's a form. We'll send you on your way." So I took the form,
went to the AA office, and then I showed them the medical
certificate, and they were like, "Oh, we can't accept this.
It's not signed." And by that point, I was pretty
much in tears. So when the duty manager
asked me to produce a driver's license, they brought me back
into the optometrist's office, where the optometrist
took my money, but then didn't tell me the truth and just sent me on my
way. They brought me back into the AA office, where I was in
tears knowing that, basically, life was gonna be
hard, especially without an official gov card style
government ID, and I had no say or choice in the
matter. So having an
official card style government issued photo ID, one with a flag on it,
one with a New Zealand government hologram on it, that can fit in my
wallet-... and I can produce anywhere, and I can use it, say, at the bank, or
enrolling to vote online without needing a birth certificate
or
citizenship certificate would make life
slightly easier for the up to 400,000 people in New Zealand who are
unable to drive due to one reason or another.
And we'll be able to give them a choice in the matter.
And I'm happy to take questions.
Just check with the committee members, any questions? Andy Foster.
Thank you very much. And, um, Ron Soosay, um, spoke to the Transport and
Infrastructure Committee a little while ago, I think it might be.
Yeah, it was excellent.
Um, you did that very, very well, very powerfully, so thank you.
Yes, thank
Um, just one quick question you've got there.
Um, so you've got, in Western Australia, for example, you've got, um, the
same photo cannot be used on both a driver's license and a photo card.
Can you just talk us through that? 'Cause the, the one concern people might have
is, there's a lot of people who, who are very nervous about any form of identity
card. And I know you said voluntary, good.
But, um, what's the, what's the thinking behind having
different, um, photo on the two
different, two different documents?
Oh, it's just for security purposes since, just
in case there's scenarios where someone might use the same
photo for different, uh, it's, it's similar to why the,
like, generally in driver's license and a passport there's different photos, just
for security reasons, just as an extra layer of security to protect against
possible fraud, identity fraud or theft.
Okay. No, thank you.
Thank you so much, uh, Ronzie. Thank you, and also to, um,
your, uh, colleague Scott as well for, for that submission.
We, we've noted your comments and, um, really appreciate you coming in today, and,
and y- for your written submission as well.
And it's also going to Trans- Transport and Infrastructure. Thank you so much.
Thank you so much. Cool, thank you very much.
We'll now move on to our next submitter who's joining us by Zoom, Aaron
Fox. Welcome, Aaron.
Thank
you. Thank you. We've got, um, five minutes to hear from you.
And we have received your written submission, so over to you.
Kia ora.
Thank you very much. Uh, thank you for the
opportunity to talk this afternoon.
Um, pity I couldn't be there in person, but with the rescheduling, uh, here I am
on, here I am on Zoom this afternoon.
So, with respect to my submission, uh, simply put, I do
ask that this committee please recommend that Clause 162 of the
Regulatory Systems Bill 2025 be deleted in full.
When I reflect upon the 50 years in which I've worked with military
history, I cannot conceive of any circumstance of why,
how, or when an exemption from the Public Records Act could ever be
warranted. Our national identity is built in part
upon our military history. That history is in turn built
upon our military archives. Where these archives have
gaps, as they do, our collective national memory is all the
poorer. Imagine attempting to relate the epic of New Zealand
at Gallipoli solely from British and Australian records.
From a multinational perspective, our role at Gallipoli was that of a small cog in
a much bigger machine. Only we can tell our distinctive story of
Anzac based on that national taonga, the official
military and the vet-, and the veterans' archives.
Now, Defence Force record keeping almost a generation ago was found to
be deficient, if not inept, by the Operation Burnham
inquiry. However, rather than committing to
rectifying this operational shortcoming, the NZDF
seems to seek instead, by means of Clause 162, to reinstate
a current, future and retrospective fix-up to relieve them of
responsibility, and excuse the administrative failures detailed in the
Operation Burnham report,
denying fault rather than correcting it.
Now, I contend that risk-averse government agencies are a liability,
and our current Commissioner of, of Police is working overtime to eliminate
group-think in his own organization.
I think equally the NZDF must enhance its record keeping so that
it remains fully accountable for overseas operations within a
multinational environment. The regulatory impact
statement does not provide a convincing rationale for this clause.
Clause 162 itself does not set out any mechanisms to
determine cause and effect, checks and balances, or approval and
appeal. I consider that the clause has been drafted in haste,
and represents an all-considered or dismissive official response to the
concerns raised by the Operation Burnham inquiry.
Our government agencies must be accountable, especially when they are operating
overseas in a multinational arrangement.
Where accountability is in question, especially with respect to full and frank
record keeping, then the overseas operation itself should be called
into, into question. Excuse me. Handing responsibility for the
maintenance of the official New Zealand record over to a third party nation or
organization is tantamount to relinquishing our hard-earned
sovereignty, our independence of action, and our autonomy of
decision-making, handing that to somebody or something else.
The Operation Burnham inquiry made it abundantly clear just how vital
efficient and detailed record keeping by New Zealand public officers
is, especially when something goes badly wrong.
E- equally, a complete and detailed public record is essential when
something goes right. Without records, how can our military veterans of the
future be properly appreciated and recognized for their
service? Without New Zealand's military archives of the future, there
may well be no future official histories of New Zealand's role in
peacemaking and peacekeeping. So in conclusion,
posterity must first remember us before it can judge
us, lest we forget. Thank you.
Mm.
Thank you so much for your submission.
Uh, we've had a couple of other, uh, submissions focused on, um, Clause
162 as well, uh, which I hope you, I don't know if you had the opportunity to hear
those earlier today.
I didn't, unfortunately. But I've read the submissions, so yes, I'm in agreement
with
what's- Yeah. Did you have, did have any, uh-... are in agreement with them.
Okay, fantastic. I'll just check if there's any other questions from members.
Tim Bosley?
I won't ... Sir, um, can I ask you a quick question while you're here, uh, since we
just have a couple of minutes of time?
Um, from your perspective as a military historian, you
spoke about the toga that sort of comes from those generations, do you
have any views on, uh, you may
have seen the, the current exhibition that encourages people to walk
over the New Zealand flag? Just with that perspective, I just thought, if you had a
minute to, to offer that
perspective?
Fortunately, that's not an official record.
Look, I hold with the, with the flag as an emblem of New
Zealand. Um, and really, if somebody wants to be controversial about
that,
fortunately it's not in a, it's not in an official public setting.
It's, it's in an art gallery, I believe. Um, it's not something I would condone.
It's not something I would, um, do myself, walking on a flag or burning it
or, or displaying it inappropriately.
No, it's,
um,
if it's our national flag, then let us treat it as such.
All right. Thanks
for that- Uh, New Zealand stood under that equi- equitably. Yeah.
I appreciate it. Thank you.
Thank you so much, Aaron. Thank you very much for your submission and for joining
us today, and apologies for the, um, changing of the times.
That's all right. Thank you for your time. Appreciate it.
Thank you so much.
Thanks, Aaron.
Appreciate that. Thank you. We now have the New
Zealand Mixed Martial Arts Federation on Zoom.
Is that correct?
Let's check if they got 10 minutes?
Um, so there's 300 agencies, I believe one person
represented from each part of the mixed, mixed martial arts has
another presenter.
Oh,
okay.
Yes?
Welcome, Matt.
Thank you.
Kia Ora, everyone. Can you hear me okay?
Kia Ora. Yes, we can.
Mm-hmm.
Just checking, are you expecting another, uh, presenter with you?
Or just, just you today?
Uh, I'll just be presenting, I think.
Um, we've got Adelina, uh, listening in as well too.
Okay, no worries. Over, over to you.
We've got, uh, two minutes for your submission. Thank you so much.
Thank you. Um,
yeah, basically, my name's Matt Tau.
Um, I represent the New Zealand Mixed Martial Arts Federation.
Uh, we're the national body for MMA here in New Zealand.
Uh, and we're currently in line with the United, uh, World Wrestling
Association and also the Association of Boxing Commissions.
So-
Okay.
... um, they're our international bodies we're aligned with, and, um, we
support the repeal of the Boxing and Wrestling Act.
Um, but we cannot res- support the repeal without, uh, a
replacement. Um,
uh, the problem basically is it's an outdated law.
Um, the act was designed originally to control gambling and
also, um, uh, gangs, uh, originally, and not to
protect the athletes. Um,
it never contemplated MMA, uh, or the modern codes as
well. Um, under this outdated framework, uh, we've had
deaths occur, uh, in combat sports, in training and in
competitions. Uh, we've had many examples of fighters being
concussed, uh, in one discipline and then going and complete- competing
into another discipline, um, just in
within a week's time. Um, there's no mandatory
medicals, there's no concussion tracking, and there's no accountability for
these things. So, um, we're relying on the good faith and the good
operating on a lot of, uh, people organizing competitions.
Um, but there's a lot of people, um, that aren't adhering to basic minimum
standards that we feel should be there.
So, um, we just think that having some sort of legislation that
will help us govern our sports properly, um, will
be definitely necessary.
Um,
the hardest thing probably is we've seen people, uh, uh, that we know
personally get fol- uh, involved in serious accidents as well, um,
through some of these procedures as well too.
And one of them was in a coma for over a year.
Uh, he was our first medal winner for the New Zealand Mixed Martial Arts Federation
at the World Championships in 2015.
Um, so it was very hard to see him in a coma,
um, uh, through one bad, uh, weight management,
uh, cutting techniques and also, um, having concussions at
training, uh, and also competing in pro boxing fights and being stocked in
that, and then competing within a month, uh, in a different, uh, type
of sport. So, um, these are the things that we're desperately trying to get a
grip of. And definitely being able to share information, um, between
the different codes is a must, but then also on top of that, uh, having
something that will force people to take mandatory stand-downs and things like that
too. Um,
I guess, uh, the solution, um,
we've proposed a combat sports commission model, uh, to mandate medical
standards and injury, uh, registries, um, also
enforce cross-code suspensions, uh, and also lic- license
officials and standardize rules amongst, um, promoters, uh,
coaches and also athletes as well, so that there's a standard for everyone to
adhere to.
Um, co-design is essential. Um, some parts of,
uh, Australia's mistakes, uh, was regulating without listening
to, uh, the people involved directly in the sports.
Um, so we definitely don't want to have to learn the same mistakes that they had to
go through. Um,
some state commissions there imposed rules that didn't fit the sports,
uh, driving events underground and also alienating practitioners as
well. So, that's again, something we don't want to repeat here.
Um,
yeah, I guess, uh, regulation with the sports, uh, builds
trust. Uh, regulation without it, it destroys it.
Um, and yeah, we're just trying to build that up
again.Uh,
in a global context, why it matters that it's not regulated properly, um,
we haven't had the UFC return to New Zealand since, uh,
2020. Um, in Australia, state governments now
are paying the UFC to host events, uh, because trusted
regulation gives confidence in safety, integrity, and also
logistics.
Uh, without credible oversight, global promotions won't come
here. Uh, they
have to import their own regulatory, uh, infrastructure, adding costs and risks
as well. Um, so it's already hard enough with us being
so isolated to get them over here. Um,
the same regulatory c- clarity that protects fighters also attracts in, uh,
investment as well, uh, and that's how we grow safely and
sustainably. Um,
we urge the committee to, uh, do not repeal without replacement,
um,
and also, uh, New Zealand can do this better than Australia
because we can do it together from the start.
And that's something that we believe in as well.
Um, yeah, is there any, any questions at all?
Just check with, uh, yeah, Andy Foster.
Look, thank you very much, Matt. Um, two questions if I can.
One is the what degree of, uh, discussion has been across the,
um, uh, I guess you could say in this case the martial arts, uh, community
in terms of, uh, of this legislation, so what, what
conversations you've had. And secondly, just having a quick look at the, um,
the Act that's proposed to be withdrawn, essentially it just looks like
a, um, a, a, a system where, uh,
any organization essentially applies to the minister and says, "Look, this is the
way we're gonna run our organization. Are you happy with it? Yes. Good. Tick.
You get a license to, to do it. If, if not, no you don't." Is that
kind of the way it-
Y- okay, so I'll answer the first one-
How big
a deal- ... so but, um, yeah, basically, um, we- we've been, we've been
bringing this particular situation up s- uh, for the last six years,
uh, with Sport New Zealand. Um, we've sent, um, delegates and
representatives over to America to learn how,
um, the different states are regulating in, in America, and
also, um, she's also been involved in, um,
investigating how they do it in Australia quite in- extensively as well,
and also places around Europe, particularly in Ireland.
So, um, the reason we're so in depth with this is
MMA, uh, one of the fastest growing sports in the world, uh, is not
actually, uh, covered by any legislation in New Zealand.
And so for us to run our NSO properly, um, we don't actually have any
teeth. So if someone decides to be a cowboy, so to speak,
and do their own things, and not adhere to our, um,
uh, what, what we would like to see, uh, people adhering to,
uh, we don't have anything that can actually stop 'em from doing it.
Um, we've had plenty of different examples of,
uh, promoters having shows without medical staff there, uh,
without the right people, um, doing doctor's
checks. And it's just a recipe for disaster.
It's an accident waiting for happen.
Um, we've also had other examples of, uh, boxing
events where police have not given licenses to certain fights, but they've
still gone ahead anyway. Uh, and nothing's getting done about it.
So, um, and again, I mentioned the earlier incident of
the, um, unfortunate person that had jumped from code to code after
being, um, stopped in one code and then competing in another and ending
up in a coma.
Mm. So what you, what it sounds like is that the existing
legislation's not really helping you very much, but you would like some
legislation-
Definitely.
... and that some shared across the sector, you know, whether it's
(overlapping speech)
Definitely, and, and-
... sports
bars (overlapping speech) Yeah. Yeah, so we see a combat sports commission being able to regulate,
uh, all of the combat sports properly.
Okay. No, thank you.
Thanks.
This definitely requires more thought.
(laughs) Definitely. Thank you. Uh, we have a question from Lomaunga Lydia
Saasima.
Uh, thanks for your submission. Uh, it's really helpful to hear
from you, not just the written submission. A couple of questions.
Uh, you have lobbied or have had (overlapping speech)
with Sport New Zealand, uh, some years ago, and
is that relationship enduring? Secondly, you've made a set of
recommendations-
If you don't have to-
... um, which is helpful. Um, so sort of where do you
see, uh, your sports code if New
Zealand Sport is not, uh, or sorry, if Sport New Zealand is not,
uh, or can partner or have further discussions with
you?
So yeah, basically, um, we've also, uh, been
approached by, uh, one of the national MPs for Mount Roskill,
um, Dr. Carlos Chung. He's, um, wanted to hear our views on things-
He's everywhere (laughs) .
Oh, sorry, what was that?
Sorry, there are just some enthusiastic supporters of Carlos, um, at the table, but
you can just repeat your-
His colleagues.
... what you just said. His colleagues.
Oh, okay. (laughs) Yeah, so Carlos has approached us and he's been fantastic with
asking us, um, uh, what we've had with issues
with regards to the current frame, uh, and how we see things, um,
being improved as well too. So I guess we're trying as many avenues as we
can to get this out there. We feel it's that important that we're just waiting for
injuries to happen in the meantime.
Okay.
There's too many gray areas where people are just doing their own things and
they're not adhering to safe practices and safety codes.
Um, we've got 15-year-olds fighting, um,
th- uh, 42-year-old professionals for world titles in some events.
Um, it's just becoming a bit of a joke and we can't do anything about it right now.
So, um, we do believe that this is something that needs to be fixed
ASAP, and it's been one of the highest, um, things that we've
been trying to achieve for six years now.
Um, just to follow on, uh, from that, so obviously you've got people that are
interested, you've got athletes who actually probably need a really good,
uh, regulatory framework, but in informing that with, uh,
an MP, you would need, uh, a bit more
information. Is, do you think that you've got enough to work
with, um, Carlos in terms of framing things up?...
'cause you've obviously got a following, you've got some international evidence.
Um, you just need a really good robust framework to go through the
system, parliamentary system.
Correct. Correct. We, we do feel like we have enough, um, information and
resources now to actually put this together.
Uh, we've talked to, uh, enough of the people in the different, uh, combat sports
as well, uh, to work out who the key figures are, and they are
actually keen to be involved with this as well too.
Um, but I'll be honest with you, the main push really does come from the
MMA community because everyone else is really covered at this stage.
So, um, but when it comes to fighter safety, then that's
one thing we have all got in common there.
Thank you.
Yeah. We've just, um, run out of time now, Matt.
But thank you so much for a really interesting submission of your engagement with
the committee. And we'll now move on to the Quarterman
Sports Advisory Committee, which I think, Adelina, you're speaking
to.
Welcome to the committee. Uh, y- we've got 10 minutes for your
submission. You would have, uh, maybe seen the previous submission, and so you're
welcome to use that time or to leave some time for questions.
Over to you.
Uh, kia ora. Thank you. Just checking you can hear me?
Yep. We can hear you. Thank you.
Okay, awesome. Um, tena koutou. My name is Adelina.
I'm from Quarterman Sports Advisory.
So we work at the intersection of sports, law, and commerce.
Um, a, a lot of my submissions will follow on from
NZMMAF, um, with the slight
difference in that I have more of a commercial POV, or point of
view, whereas NZMMAF is purely
regulatory. Um, so, uh, I won't speak
to every single one of the submissions, but I, uh, I will make,
um, highlight which I think are the most important today.
So, uh, my message today is pretty
simple. It's just that the, the repeal of the Boxing and Wrestling Act, um,
is not a small and minor, minor matter.
Um, I did read in Hansard that it was referred to as a rats and mice matter,
which, you know, to an extent, the entire bill is.
However, um, i- in regards to the Boxing and Wrestling Act, it's
a structural change, um, that will shape whether combat sports
in New Zealand are safed- safe, investable, and internationally
credible. Um, so, you know, as was said in the
last submission, repeal isn't the problem.
Um,
I, I would, uh, repeal of the act is good.
It's, uh, outdated and not fit for purpose.
Um, but what we don't want to happen is repeal without at least a
plan for replacement. Um, without any sort of
framework, we revert to an unregulated gray zone, and what tends to
happen there is that there'll be police discretion deciding what goes ahead.
Um, and that sort of uncertainty for commercial actors in particular, like,
uh, promoters, it discourages, it discourages promoters
from, um, from operating within this
industry and that, and that invites risk, um,
in the types of characters which are attracted
to, um, participate in an
unregulated industry. So,
we've seen overseas that regulation enables commerce.
So the UFC was mentioned in the previous, um,
submission. That's the Ultimate Fighting Championship, but they're the main
MMA, um, promotion worldwide, and
they are responsible for the growth of MMA, um,
worldwide. They pushed for that for about 10 years, and it
really didn't start getting traction until the Nevada State Athletic
Commission, um, started regulating very
seriously, and that has now grown into a multi-billion dollar
industry.
Right.
Um, as was mentioned as well, the UFC hasn't staged an event
here since 2020. There's obviously a f- a lot of factors for
that, but one of those, and I know this from conversations had
with regulators in the States, um,
uh, many promotions would prefer to come to a, to a market where
there is trusted regulation, um, and internationally
aligned regulation in place. Because first of all, it means they don't have to
fly people all the way over from America to regulate their shows,
um, and it just makes it a lot easier for them in that
sense. Um,
i- one
point, if you don't remember anything I say today, uh, I, it would be this,
is that, please do not, uh, follow our t-
the tendency to just see what our brothers over
across the ditch have done and, and implement that.
Um, not all Australian models for combat sport
regulation have worked effectively.
In some of their states, regulation was imposed without
consultation with industry, and in
a- as a result, that alienated practitioners, over-complicated
compliance, and it, and it fractured the combat community.
So, that's what we don't want to happen here in New
Zealand. Um,
there is a real opportunity for New Zealand.
You know, we have such a, where there's a geographic isolation,
that's clear. We're never gonna overcome that.
Um, but it's more, uh, we could see it as an
opportunity rather than as an issue.
So our small size lets us integrate safety, governance, and
commerce in one model. And there's nothing to say that we couldn't design a
combat sports commission alongside, you know, with government
alongside with the combat sport industry,
um, in a way that large jurisdictions just aren't able to do
easily. So, that's potential for New Zealand to create something
novel, um, and become a trusted global destination
for, for combat sports.
So-You know, just to—
uh, in conclusion, repeal should not mean
deregulation. It should mean modernisation.
Um, some sort of combat sports regulation,
uh, whether it's an act or a commission that pro- protects athletes, gives
promoters confidence, and positions New Zealand on the world
stage. Safety, integrity, and commerce are not competing
objectives. They're interdependent, and
pro- you know, present New Zealand with a great
opportunity. And New Zealand, as we know, um, we're
storied for creating and developing and
exporting incredible sporting talent.
There's nothing to say we can't do the same with,
um,
sporting business, sporting structure, sporting governance.
Um, so I'll leave it there, if there are any
questions.
Thank you so much. We do have a couple of questions.
We'll start with the Maunga Lydia Sosene and then go to Andy Foster.
Thanks for your submission. Uh, it's really helpful to understand sort of the
overall high-level, um,
trajectory that you've talked about.
The modernisation, just two questions.
Modernisation, because there's no sort of facts and figures, um, it's quite a
general, uh, overall that you're asking the committee to strongly
consider, not completely, uh, letting go of it.
But your request is to modernise. Second question is around
the numbers. Um, are you... I mean, I don't have any
understanding of how big it is, uh, with different codes in New
Zealand. Is that what you're asking the committee?
'Cause it'd be helpful that you're really clear, um, to
say to the committee exactly what you're after.
So, um, it's just a little bit hard to judge 'cause you're talking more from
a position or recommendation not to repeal it, but
to modernise it. And it would be helpful to have sort of further
information, although the committee won't have any time to do that.
So, what is the thing that you would be focusing on
given your sort of like the business side of it?
Okay. So, as was, you know, referred to in the
previous submission, um,
uh,
the advocacy for reform in this space has been going on for some
time without any traction. Um, that, you know, Dr
Carlos Cheung being, uh, you know, he's proactively
reached out to different actors in the, in the combat sports
community. That we would see as progress, um, and that
is really the realistic, um, pathway forward, um,
is, you know, if select committee is able to make a recommendation that yes,
repeal this act, however, have, you know, what
is... I-i-it can't just be that the act is repealed and then
it, things just fade into this grey zone.
There has to be some sort of push to say these conversations with, you
know, headed by Dr Carlos Cheung or whoever needs to, need to be,
um, followed up or implore Sport New Zealand, um, to get involved in this
conversation more seriously. Um, you know, whether there's some sort of
panel, uh, amongst all the different combat sport codes because
MMA is one sport, then of course there's the very important
boxing. Then there are other sports which don't even have national bodies
which are recognised, so like Muay Thai kickboxing.
Um, it, it's just, it... There needs to be some
sort of clear plan for contacting every single one
of those combat codes, having a conversation with them, getting them to
work together about what could this work?
What could this look like working together?
S- Uh, because only in doing that will it become clear what
some sort of collaborative co- co-
co-designed combat sports commission could look like.
And any, any of those things that I've just said haven't been done at all
in the last however many years. So, whatever power
or influence the select committee has to suggest,
um, that that happens following the repeal of
the act, uh, is what I would say needs to
happen.
Thank you.
That's very helpful. Thank you. We've got another question from Andy Foster.
Yeah, thanks Adelina. Um, two, uh... First thing is, you're not, you're...
So you're not particularly invested at all in the existing
legislation?
No. No.
Then I'm saying existing legislation doesn't do the business.
Okay, that's nice and clear. So the, the... So are the models...
You said don't look across Tasman. Um, but are the models...
I mean, the, the... When, whenever you said the word commission, that suggests an
American model, but, um, is, is there a particular model you've looked at and said
that's a good start to think about, um, what are
the regulatory model...
I would suggest that,
that perhaps Canada, that, um, you know, it's put forward
that you look to how Canada...
Okay.
Um,
Canada look... Sorry, regulates combat sports.
Um, and then there are certainly smaller states within America,
um, because we're never gonna be as big as say California or New York.
Um, but the difference can be, you know, New York is extremely,
um, uh, focused on compliance, whereas smaller
jurisdictions probably fit New Zealand better.
Um, and so yeah, it's just a matter of consulting the right
people who actually know that stuff, um, and, and getting that conversation
going. Also, the head, the commissioner of the
California State Commission, his name is, um, Andy Foster.
Just wanted to say that.
Oh, very good.
(laughs)
We'd better go and talk to him then.
Yeah. (laughs)
Well, thank you-
There's tension. Hey, thank you.
... so much, um, Adelina for your, uh, very comprehensive, um, and
interesting submission. Uh, so thanks very much. We've noted your comments today.
Thank you.
Thanks very much. We've got our next, uh, Perry McArdle, who's
(...)
Welcome, Gary. Thank you for your written submission, which we've
received and we've got five minutes today.
Uh, so if you want to use all of that time, we'll leave some time for questions.
Over to you.
Hi, uh, thank you for having me. Uh, my name is Perry, and for a bit of
background, my husband and I began our fertility journey back in
2018, so about seven years ago. Um, and it was really
important to me to make a submission today because it's rare to have
this opportunity, um, to flag an issue with the Heart Act, and this
is legislation that, in my view, needs updating to reflect
the realities that families face today.
Um, I will be focusing on one specific issue, and while this was not
originally, uh, in the proposed changes, I would like to see this
change considered, uh, and that is Section 10 of the Heart
Act. And Section 10 sets out a 10-year storage
limit for embryos and gametes in New Zealand.
As the law currently stands, ECART, the ethics committee,
can only approve an extension for storage of embryos or gametes
before the storage period expires, uh, and on top of that, the
storage period includes any time they have been stored
overseas.
Uh, and once that 10 years has passed, even by a short amount of
time, ECART loses all legal authority to consider an
application at all. Uh, doesn't matter how reasonable or ethical that,
uh, circumstance may be. I did want to note, I don't
personally believe that our specific case, which you would have read
about, um, was ever an intended outcome when the act was
written. I think our specific case is an unintended failure and
unfortunately, when this provision fails someone, there's currently no process
to correct it. Um, so what you would have seen in our submission is that our
gametes, uh, were stored overseas in Canada as part of a
cancer-related treatment. Before they expired, though I will note
we were unaware of any expiration, um, law,
we sought the advice here in New Zealand.
We approached our GP, we met with a fertility specialist, and
neither raised to us that New Zealand had this strict 10-year
law. Um, and then by the time we attempted to transfer our gametes
home, we learned we were now five years past the limit,
uh, at which time ECART could not help us, not because they disagreed with our
case, but because the legislation gave them no legal ability to
even consider it. Um, and as a result, at 27 and
31, we lost the ability to use our own reproductive tissue in New
Zealand. Um, and again, this is solely due to the rigid
application of this timeframe and the absence
of any post-expiry mechanism, uh, currently in the act, of
which there is none. Um, so this highlights some key
issues. The law prevents ECART from doing its job as an ethics
body, in my opinion, um, and patients can lose access to their own
tissue, specifically New Zealanders, uh, like ourselves.
We're not talking about donor tissue; we're talking about our own personal
human tissue, um, and that's not necessarily because of ethical
concerns, but because of timing technicalities.
Um, and I did want to note that the strict 10-year limit is not
necessarily the global standard.
Uh, in Canada, where thankfully our gametes are currently stored, there's no
statutory time limit. Consent is what governs use,
and in Australia, several states, including Queensland, who most
recently updated their policy last year, do not impose a fixed
storage limit at all. Um, for some final
words, because I did want to leave time if there was a question, um, I wanted
to share the exact words that ECART wrote to us when they were forced to
decline our application of extension.
They wrote, and I quote, "Unfortunately, ECART is not infrequently
placed in a position where it considers it has no choice but to decline an
application for an extension of storage on the basis that the Heart
Act does not allow it to consider applications which are
received more than 10 years after the initial storage date.
ECART has raised its concerns about the restrictive nature of these provisions and
the impact of their application with ACART.
ECART is an advocate for and would fully support legislative change
to allow ECART the discretion to consider extending storage in
circumstances such as yours." Um, so yeah, thank you for the
opportunity today.
Thank you so much, Perry-
All right.
... and thank you for sharing your personal story as well.
I know that was, um, that's really brave of you to be able-
Yeah.
... to share that publicly.
Mm-hmm.
Uh, I'll just check with the committee members if there's-
Yeah, I just wanna check on my jacket.
... any questions.
Uh, Andy Foster.
Yeah, look, uh, Perry, thank you, um, and thank you again for your courage.
Um, just where did that 10 years come from in the first place?
Do you have any idea at all? I mean, it doesn't sound as though it's based on any-
No, um-
... science, science or longevity.
Yeah, I mean, because it was written some time ago, it could potentially, you
know, have had some legs at the time.
Um, you know, I have my own theories around potential cost of
storage but, uh, there's no real insight I've been able to find
around why.
All right.
Thank you so much.
We'll definitely take some advice on that, um, and note that in our report.
Mm-hmm.
Thank you so much.
Thank you.
Right, we now have our last submitter in person, the New Zealand Council for Civil
Liberties. Oh, sorry, they're on Zoom.
Welcome, Stephen.
Thank you. Um, uh, Tēnā koutou. My name is Stephen Ensslin.
I am the deputy chair of the New Zealand Council for Civil Liberties.
Um, on the 22nd of August in 2010,
NZDF, uh, attacked two villages, killing five civilians,
including a three-month-old child.
Um, no one was held accountable for Operation Burnham.
There will never be justice for the people who were killed because there are
insufficient records to prove what happened.
Uh, the primary recommendation of the official inquiry was to improve
recordkeeping, and now Clause 162 of this bill, uh,
seeks to undo the primary improvement which could have resulted from that
tragedy. The Council for Civil Liberties is intimately
familiar with this story. Uh, most of the people we work with have
been unable to obtain justice because whichever agency they believe has harmed them
has conveniently failed to keep sufficient records to prove, um, what
occurred.Um, the counsel also has considerable expertise
in open government. We regularly speak to government officials and ordinary
people who are concerned that trust in government is
declining. Um, there are many causes for this, but the
increase in government secrecy needs to be emphasized as a cause of
distrust. Transparency is not merely the best
disinfectant, it is the best tool we have to build trust in
government. Transparency is also a two-way
street. Not only can people outside government not see that their
liberties are being respected, no one outside government can disprove
outlandish rumors about the government.
If NZDF kept proper records when they were overseas, we would not have
rumors circulating about NZDF having committed war crimes
overseas. Thousands of New Zealanders hold fringe
beliefs which could be disproven with better transparency.
All of the parties in parliament claim they want people to trust in government,
yet over and over again, we see, uh, sorry, we undermine trust in
government by legislating, uh, for increases in
secrecy. The counsel asks you to stand up for
democracy by removing clause 162 from the bill.
And that's all of my prepared statements.
Thank you so much. I'll just check with the committee members if they have, uh, any
questions. Tim Cosgrove?
Ju- just a quick one. Just, I just wanna make sure I've unders- understood this.
So, what you're saying is you accept the findings of the Op
Burnham report, it just could, a- and that no war crimes were
committed, there were no vengeance killings, all that kind of thing.
But those rumors could have been shut down earlier had there been better record
keeping?
I- indeed, they could have been shut down earlier-
Yeah.
... and I think it is fair to say that the
report, um, its conclusion was that they could not prove that war
crimes were committed. Um, there is, in particular,
um, some parts of the report that, uh, mention that the New
Zealand, sorry, not New Zealand, the, the, you know, US Air Force was involved in
the operation, and that they were unable to ascertain the,
um, whether the actions of, uh, the
US Air Force were just or not.
Yeah. And so on that point,
put- putting aside the fact that there was, there was no proof of any wrongdoing
by, uh, by Kiwi troops, um, how do you think, would
removing this clause, would that actually enable us to reach into the US
to access their records? 'Ca- 'cause that's a really interesting point that
you raise.
Indeed, it, uh, it would not, um, uh, allow us to reach into-
Right.
... um, the, we're not changing that aspect of things.
Okay. Thank you.
Thank you. I don't think we have any ques- further questions.
Um, that particular clause has been brought up a f- a few times, um, and so,
um, we, we, we definitely note, um, your concerns and I think your submission was,
um, uh, mentioned by one of our, um, colleagues in the, the previous
hearings as well. So thank you so much for taking the time to put in the
submission, for appearing in front of us today, and also for answering our
questions. We really appreciate it.
Well, thank you for your consideration.
Thank you so much.
Thank you.